# AFNI Glossary

Below there is a list of words/terms you will hear all the time when working with AFNI and in conversations with other members of the lab. Here is a non-technical description of many of this terms.

- **AFNI** – The set of programs we use to clean and analyze fMRI data.
- **SUMA** – An additional AFNI tool, with a separate interface and set of command line programs that talks to the AFNI interface.  This is often how you get your AFNI data to map to a pretty 3D-looking brain.  However, remember, you are actually mapping (via projection) to a 2D surface. You’ll find that people REALLY care about this distinction, so beware. Knowing this will also make SUMA easier to use.  
- **pre-processing** – The term for “cleaning” fMRI data.  Remember that fMRI data is noisy, and that we want to remove all known noise before we perform statistical analysis.  Counter-intuitively, the number of pre-processing steps can be longer than the number of analysis steps you take.
- **processing/analysis** – This are the statistical steps you take with your fMRI data, once the noise is removed to the best of your ability.  If you have task data, you will often perform a linear regression from the task and/or perform a task comparison.  If you have rest data, you often do a connectivity analysis, where we look all over the brain to determine which areas co-vary in time.
- **volume** – 3D data for the, well, volume, you’re measuring (usually almost the entire brain), at one time point
- **voxel** – 3D pixel, or the location in the brain where you get a single value for each time point.
- **time series** – For an individual voxel, the values for each time point stringed together.  Keep in mind the spacing of these timepoints (typically your TR, e.g., TR=2.5s), and the number of time points (e.g., # of measurements).
- **bricks** – Your 4D data (3D space + 1D time/3D space + statistical measures/etc.), stored in .BRIK files. The .BRIK files have a .HEAD file associated with it.
- **sub-bricks** – The individual “bricks” (3D units) in your .BRIK files.  These sub-bricks may be brain volumes for individual time points, statistical maps, anatomical images, or other 3D datasets (like masks). In AFNI, start counting your sub-bricks at 0, not 1
- **header** – The header information is stored in the .HEAD files.  This information contains all types of metadata.  For example, the header information for standard fMRI data will include TR, slice timing, “space”, orientation, etc.  These .HEAD files have a .BRIK file brother.
- **+orig/+tlrc** – These suffixes for AFNI file names guide you in determining what “space” you data is in.  “+orig” typically means that your data is in subject space – basically in the orientation/centering/”grid”/etc. that the data came off the scanner with.  “+tlrc” generally means that the data is in some standard template space.  E.g., Anatomical templates like the MNI atlas will be +tlrc, while your data will initially be in +orig, and you may wish to transform it to +tlrc.  “+tlrc” stands for Talariach, though you are more likely to encounter the MNI atlas (historical artifact).   AFNI doesn’t always update this information correctly, so be careful what space your in, and how AFNI is naming your data.
- **underlay** – When you open the AFNI interface, your underlay is the data you are putting on the “bottom,” in a visual sense.  This will often be your anatomical data, because it gives a crisper reference map of geographical information of the brain, compared to functional data (because it is typically collected with a higher resolution).  However, there is a good reason to occasionally put your functional data as the underlay; when you want to graph the values of all your sub-briks (with the “Graph” button), you need to set that data as the underlay.  This feature is specifically useful for looking at timeseries in individual voxels and its neighbor voxels.  If your underlay has multiple sub-bricks (e.g., functional data), you can play your data as a movie, and visually inspect how activation changes over time.
- **overlay** – This is the data you put on “top” of your underlay data.  This will often be the statistical maps resulting from your data analysis.  If you overlay your functional data on top of your anatomical data, you will only see the functional data one time point at a time, and therefore may not be too useful for viewing your data.  However, overlaying your functional data over your anatomical data or template atlas is a great way to check whether your alignment steps have worked correctly
- **alignment/registration/transformation** - In fMRI, we often overlay functional data over anatomical data so that we can make inferences between brain location and brain function. However, because difference types of scanner pulse sequences capture the anatomical data and functional data, they do not “stack” correctly.  Additionally, we sometimes want to make comparisons over a group of subjects, whose brains size and shape will vary, so we adjust to a template space or average group space.  Therefore, we want to “align” (create a meaningful overlap) and “register” (match curves of one map with the curves of another – these subtle geographic details matter) anatomical, functional, and template brains together.  These transformations allow proper “stacking.” These three words are sometimes used interchangeably in conversion, but do have specific meanings.
